you can fast without ever being hungry
and without ever suffering
and you'll have more energy
everybody welcome to another episode of
health theory i am here with a multiple
pete guest who i always enjoy spending
time with dave asprey dave welcome to
the show
um i'm so happy to be back and i'm sad
i'm not in your living room oh man same
um you wrote a book on fasting
and i have to say when i picked it up
the first question i had was
what is he going to talk about that's
new in a book on fasting and i was quite
surprised with where you went
the thing that took me by surprise is
this whole notion of there are many ways
to fast and
walk us through that
when you started this did you naturally
assume that fasting was just not eating
because you've given pretty broad
options
i did start out with that that
perspective but then i started seeing
people
making mistakes where oh if something's
good for you more of it must be better
and the same things they do with keto
with the vegan diet you know where if if
it works i got to do more and more and
more and it turns out fasting's not like
that and no one talks about the
spiritual side of fasting oh that's on
my list for today to be sure
why why is it problematic though to go
all in like when i think about autophagy
and the cells cleaning themselves up and
knowing that that gets kick-started by
just not eating
why is it problematic to go too hard on
a fast
well there's a name for over-fasting
it's called starvation and malnutrition
so there's that now do you do you
bracket that only by time though so is
that like if i was gonna do a three-day
fast
um i would think that your advice would
be go all in but obviously having read
the book i know you have a different
punch line so
um
is is it that it becomes problematic as
you get into the 7 10 21 day range or do
you think that that's actually
sub-optimal from the jump
you know i'm totally happy to do a
three-day fast four day five day seven
day ten day although when you get to ten
and beyond you probably want to be very
experienced or have some medical
oversight because your electrolytes are
likely to get out of whack and frankly
your ability to really detect what's
going on your body isn't very good like
you're kind of loopy after 10 days of
fasting you have like clarity but you're
also ungrounded
and you're talking about water only
fasting
um even if you're having tea and coffee
and water only fasting is basically a
form of self flagellation i call that
hair shirt fasting
hair shirt
so
monks used to because they were such
sinners they would make shirts out of
human hair that were super itchy and
then they'd wear them all day so the
itchiness would remind them of how bad
they were in other words it's
self-inflicted suffering that you didn't
need to do
so it's okay most
everyone has herbal tea in every
spiritual tradition ever or just black
tea or green tea
um so the fact that mice did water
fasting is because they didn't have
anything else they're mice and so water
only fasting is for uh perfectionists
kind of purists you don't have to do
that to get the benefits in fact you'll
probably get more if you have some
polyphenols during your fast all right
so let's define some terms here so i've
always thought of fasting as you put
nothing in your mouth that isn't exactly
h2o that anything beyond maybe
i
recently broadened my stance to include
salt just normal tablespoons that's
pretty important
and attention
so walk us through then so if we've got
okay at water only becomes problematic
roughly around 10 days and i'll say that
that seems slightly
controversial i've heard people say that
you can go farther with supervision
but broaden my notion of what a fast is
the definition of fasting is simply to
go without
and you can fast from many things you
can fast from masturbation you can fast
from porn you can fast from alcohol
right you can fast from junk food it's
called eating healthier you can fast
from carbs it's called the keto diet you
can fast from animal products even
though it's a bad idea for long periods
of time it's called the vegan diet and
there's all sorts of things
so fasting literally means to go without
for a set period of time
and all of those things can make you
stronger and a lot of people mix up the
metabolic and the cognitive and the
health benefits of fasting with the
self-control benefits and they try to
mix them up
and the truth of the matter is that you
and i are pretty fortunate you know
we've
had companies that have done well
and we don't have to worry about getting
up driving for an hour in traffic our
kids are now staying at home with you
know two kids hanging off each arm and
just a huge amount of chaos oh and on
top of that i'm just gonna fast today
even though i'm metabolically not really
in good shape and what's gonna happen is
you'll be just like me when i weigh 300
pounds you're going to be hypogly [__]
you're going to be hangry you're going
to yell at your kids you're going to
yell at your boss
and it's not going to be a good day and
you're going to say basically f fasting
this is stupid it doesn't work but you
don't have to do that you don't have to
experience pain and hunger to get the
benefits of fasting and to go into
fasting and after
10 plus years of recommending this in my
my writing
and 15 years of practicing this what you
find out is that there are things that
you can do in literature that don't
trigger the two things that break a fast
what breaks a fast is having sugar or
carbohydrate that raises your insulin so
if you keep insulin low and your blood
glucose won't change much except for
based on your adrenal
adrenal function
if you do that and you don't eat protein
which impacts a whole different set of
enzymes you're getting the benefits of
fasting and now some people are already
up in arms going you can't have 5 000
calories of fat no you would get
disaster pants if you did that but you
can have
small amounts of this and the evidence i
have for this is called
number one bulletproof protein fasting
which has been practiced since 2012 when
i wrote about it and this is you eat
less than 15 grams of protein during a
day
but you eat
carbs and you eat fat and magically
autophagy turns on in studies you can do
that so i think we're gonna have to
we're gonna have to define then what the
biological markers are that we're um
bracketing fasting with so if the
loosest definition of fasting is going
without but now we as we get into sort
of metabolic fasting or dietary fasting
there's certain parameters that we're
looking for so
i've heard people define it as you
started that you break a fast with
anything that raises your insulin and
should you take in something that
doesn't raise your insulin then you have
not broken your fast and so i'm just
curious as one why do people use insulin
as the marker is insulin the only marker
of a fast or if it if you're not an
autophagy it's technically not a fast
like what are the the parameters by
which you say this still qualifies as a
fast
it depends on your goals and the type of
fast you're looking for
right so some people fast for
uh healing the gut
right and during that kind of a fast you
might want to have
just water you probably want to have
water plus these colored compounds in
tea or coffee because those feed good
bacteria they're a prebiotic you might
also use one of the three fasting hacks
that just turn off the pain of fasting
for people just need to get through the
day and fast and get healthier along the
way is prebiotic fiber
so you can do that and what does
prebiotic fiber get rid of
symptomatically headaches hunger
prebiotic fiber feeds the bacteria in
your gut so they make less
lipopolysaccharide which is a major
issue during fasting it also makes sure
that you don't starve the gut bacteria
and when you do that you turn off hunger
and there's multiple studies that show
that the soluble fiber that cannot be
digested by you
um that it helps support good gut
bacteria so now you're fasting you're
not dealing with a large amount of
lipopolysaccharides which are bacterial
toxins they make when they're stressed
in the gut
so then like oh wait a minute i had
healthier gut bacteria my blood sugar
didn't change but the gut bacteria
converted this fiber into butyric acid
or butyrate which is a ketogenic
compound
so all of a sudden oh i didn't
experience hunger this morning wasn't
that great i didn't spend half my
morning thinking about muffins and
barely make it through the day and i
still got my fast in and this idea that
you have to feel pain and suffering and
just like muscle through it it doesn't
work for people who have a lot going on
in fact it makes it much harder i don't
believe in causing suffering unless
there's a hormetic effect and there's no
other way to do it
okay so let's talk about the
goal of a fast so
um
one so you just talked about healing a
gut so there we might have different
outcomes that we're looking for
basically you'd be resting the gut you
even say in the book if you have a gut
problem you're trying to heal it the
easiest way to heal it is to not have
anything in the gut um so that makes a
lot of sense so we're not necessarily
worried about insulin going up down or
indifferent we're not necessarily
worried about even calories being
present we're worried about having
things for the bacteria in your gut to
have to work on so that they can just
take a break and sort of hit the reset
button now if i'm doing a
fast where my specific goal is to get
into autophagy
what can we intake
and still have autophagy being present
like can i have
uh
fat in my diet and stay in
autophagy or
what does that look like you can have
moderate amounts of fat in your diet and
still stay an autophagy but in
the research that i did and in the
conversations with other experts it's
apparent that having only fat isn't
going to affect autophagy now if you
have
3 000 calories of fat a caloric excess
can inhibit autophagy but no one's ever
studied what a fat only caloric excess
looks like because no one would actually
do that
so
there's also a lot of things like the
fasting mimicking diet that turn on on
top of even though you're eating some
stuff and what elements of the fast are
they mimicking
well it's a very low calories for five
days about 500 calories or so
for five days and this is based on
research from walter longo who's what
i'd call the godfather of fasting and
one of the the top fasting experts out
there today so they're saying hmm we're
turning on autophagy even though we're
eating some stuff so you can't even say
protein without saying which proteins
there's some proteins you can't even
digest and maybe those wouldn't affect
it so it gets very specific around some
amino acids raise insulin a lot more so
is
you know a few teaspoons of whey protein
gonna break a fast more than collagen
probably but it depends on your
individual response to those ideally
though less than 15 grams of
protein from all sources is going to
maintain your state of autophagy and
this goes back to like my first big book
in 2014 and that data was out there and
based on studies so the deal is just
have no protein and have no sugar and no
carbs you can digest and the fasting
processes will work
there's one little asterisk to that
statement and we're getting relatively
technical
one of the things that happens when you
fast is there's something called
fiat it's fasting induced adipose factor
and your liver turns this on
it says oh i'm fasting um there's no
calories i better use this and what is
it accelerates fat burning and when
you're not fasting it accelerates fat
storage
unfortunately if you have a lot of bad
gut bacteria
they're like oh
this petri dish is our petri dish so
we're going to hack it and the bacteria
themselves will make more fasting
induced adipose factor than your liver
would naturally which means that you
lose weight faster when you're fasting
but you gain weight faster when you're
eating and this is a question
because they want to make sure that
their petri dish doesn't starve and also
is a little bacteria i don't have any
food let me tell the petri dish to
secrete more energy so it can go find
food and then i'll get food
so they're literally changing your
behavior and it it's fascinating that
they do this but you can also manipulate
them knowing that they do this and so
fasting can help you lose weight but if
you have good gut bacteria present and
you're aware of that fact you can do
things like consume that tea those
polyphenols that feeds good bacteria
called the bacteriodes family so the
colored compounds and fruits and
vegetables and coffee and tea and
chocolate
are all prebiotics for good gut bacteria
that you cannot buy in a probiotic and
so having healthy gut bacteria resolves
that problem and the the reality is that
you and i are from the perspective of
our mitochondria which are the things
we're working on mostly in fact most of
my work is around mitochondria these are
ancient bacteria embedded in our body
they think they're in charge and they're
the ones driving your hunger your fear
your cravings
they're the ones that make you you know
date people you shouldn't be dating and
they drive human desire in fact there's
an order of operations from them that i
described in the book and this is the
algorithm for all life forms
and so they're messing with you and then
you have gut bacteria that are also
messing with you by secreting their own
factors to try and get your body to do
what they want you to do and then for us
we're also in there in our logical
cognitive brains going
wait a minute i'm getting pulled all
over the place by these urges
right and then eventually when your
energy is lower and your urges are high
your ability to manage your emotions
goes down
your ability to make good decisions goes
down and then you eat the cookie and
that's the annoying thing
so when i think about um
all of this stuff sort of working in
concert this big cacophony of things
happening you've got the mitochondria
are pulling you in one direction you've
got the bacteria in your gut pulling you
and another you have your own body's
response to
um lack of food
we've got autophagy that's working for
us we're cleaning up the cells so i
could see how that would speak to
longevity maybe even clarity but other
than autophagy
what are some of the reasons that
fasting is so important for people
the number one reason isn't autophagy
that's actually kind of a nerd
reason for fasting and i say that
happily being a nerd
most people who are practicing
intermittent fasting today don't even
know what autophagy is and that's okay
what they know is that they fast and
they get energy
right and it's a lot of energy because
even if we're eating a so-called healthy
diet
um according to the the bulletproof
stuff the first chapter of the book
there's five classes of toxins made by
mother nature
that we're eating every day
right and
the first one i think is the first big
book about it was lectins not all
lectins are bad but these are defense
molecules for certain types of foods
like grains and bell peppers and things
like that and they make you really
hungry and they mess with you right and
then you look at things like
phytic acids that inhibit your ability
to absorb minerals there goes your
argument for a whole grain kind of thing
because they're full of these things
that stop you from having zinc there's a
problem there and then we have histamine
which forms in certain foods and they
sit around that gives you just severe
cravings and then you have oxalic acid
which is kale and charred and raw
spinach which i've been warning about
for years and then the fifth one is
mycotoxins that grow on food
in the field and while it's stored and
all of those will mess with you and when
you fast you get none of those it's like
wow i feel so good and it's not the
fasting it's that you're not eating
stuff that makes you feel bad that
you're used to eating every day so
that's a a hidden side benefit of
fasting
yeah so getting into like inflammation
and things like that and fasting having
such a profound impact on that
what i want to know
when we start fasting and we're having
the
our energy levels are going up because
we're not in taking a bunch of things
that you know whether it's just bad food
or whether it's the toxins you're
talking about
we also are getting this lowering of
inflammation
one i'm curious what's causing the
lowering of inflammation is it simply
the absence of the toxins that you
mentioned or
is there more to it
there's two big things going on one is
the absence of toxins the other one is
that ketones themselves
are anti-inflammatory profoundly
anti-inflammatory so now you're saying
wait a minute uh i'm having less
inflammation because
if i had to guess
i'm gonna say
it's probably two-thirds caused by not
eating stuff that makes you weak and
one-third caused by the presence of
ketones um the inflammatory things i
could be wrong but that's you know a
very rough estimate of why and if you
were to say i'm gonna go on a super
clean no plant toxin kind of diet you
feel pretty similar but you're still
going to have blood sugar swings that
you don't get when you're fasting they
generally after a little while it
stabilizes
okay so we've got fasting playing this
insane role when we're talking about
metabolic diseases which depending on
who you talk to is everything from
cancer heart disease alzheimer's like
there must be some common thing that
this all has
working together so is it insulin people
have referred to alzheimer's as type 3
diabetes type 3 of the brain
is it just inflammation in general from
the ketone bodies like what what is it
that is operating across all these
different
disease manifestations
what's going on there is you're getting
a metabolic reset and you're getting a
lot of autophagy you're taking the the
mitochondria that are weak
they've learned and there's a
quadrillion of them way more than our
cells in your body and they've learned
yeah there's lots of food coming i don't
really have to do anything it's okay if
i'm running at you know 50 efficiency
it's good enough for the world i'm in
and then suddenly like i'm in a world
where i have to be able to really be on
my toes
the body looks around and says well this
sucks i guess i'm gonna have to kick out
all the weak mitochondria and go to the
expensive process of building fresh new
ones that are young
and those are the mitochondria that can
effectively and efficiently use glucose
or ketones
and that's what's causing a lot of this
it's removal of senescent cells
but even then if you were to take a
water fast and you would say hey i'm
going to do
500 milligrams of fissitin and 2 grams
of quercetin which are massive synalytic
promoters you're going to get more out
of it but now you're not on water only
fast you're using supplements in a
targeted way
to improve autophagy
and
so i believe that the the puritanical
approach of just water isn't advisable
but i do think if you're going to do
stuff during a fast it's got to be
limited and you've got to know what it
is and why you're taking it for instance
there's other supplements that i
recommend and fast this way that improve
the body's ability to do what it does
during fasting i'm talking about
proteolytic enzymes things like
serrapeptase and nanokinase and what
these do is they help the body to break
down waste proteins and scar tissue
since the body's already working on that
and you give it more of the enzymes it
needs that means your pancreas and
discerning state your liver can make the
enzymes that they need to make for
repairing dna and refolding proteins and
things like that because some of the
cleanup proteins you've already taken
orally
you can also take
things like activated charcoal during a
fast and because your gut bacteria get
really stressed and they make more of
that lipopolysaccharide or lps we talked
about earlier if you bind that in the
gut
you actually have less inflammation but
you feel a lot better so the the water
only thing is like i'm just gonna put my
head down and go through it
i just don't believe in extra suffering
i would say anyone on a water fast who
adds activated charcoal is going to have
better results a hundred percent of the
time because it's blocking the toxins
from coming out into the body i know in
the book you said that part of the keto
flu that people experience when they're
beginning fasting or beginning a keto
diet is mitigated by taking activated
charcoal for that reason it's
interesting i wish i had known that the
first time that i did keto which i had
brutal keto flu it was
god-awful
um what are some of the other because
you give many different styles of
fasting
and ways to mitigate some of the the
difficulties that people can have with
fasting so what are some of the other
things that we need to address and how
do we address them
one of the biggest concerns there is is
people are saying fasting makes me feel
good so i'm gonna just do it every day
they go you know what i'm gonna try this
new omad thing where i only eat dinner
right like i'll do that every day for a
week or so this is awesome i've never
heard of that
one meal a day oh mad yeah so omad is
one meal a day and they're saying okay
um that's that's great and oh man it's
really easy skip breakfast get lunch
have dinner there you just did a 24 hour
fast it's not as sexy as it sounds like
i'm all mad i'm i'm keto i'm strong
it's literally you skip two meals not
good for you
and
uh during the day though you might get a
little bit hungry but there's things you
can do so if you ate if you eat the
right food you won't be hungry after you
eat and if you eat the wrong food which
most of us do at least one or two things
is off then an hour too late we're like
man i really want some food i got a
sugar craving what's going on and then
you have to work on it so learning how
to eat is an important part of not
experiencing pain during a fast but
people are like okay i can do a 24 hour
fast man i feel so good i'm rocking it
what's really happening though is
they're kind of getting a little bit
stressed biologically they're feeling
good mentally but their body is saying
okay i'm making a lot of cortisol and
adrenaline right now
which i'm using to break down some
muscles so i can have enough glucose to
keep my brain running because this isn't
a fat burning body yet like your
metabolism isn't flexible and if you've
been eating bad fats for years it's
going to take a while to fix your
mitochondria what's the ideal split for
you
the ideal split is whatever you'll do
and 16-8 is great but for 16 hours of
not eating and then i eat however much i
want in an eight-hour window or do you
put limitations in the eating window you
can eat as much as you want during the
window of twinkies
uh you know you can and you'll still get
benefits to be perfectly honest you'll
just get more benefits if you eat good
stuff during the window and that's the
other thing okay maybe you don't want to
go grass-fed only maybe you don't want
to eliminate french fries from your
universe
okay fine intermittent fasting will help
everybody even on a complete crap diet
however you'll be more hungry during
your intermittent fast if you eat crap
so you got to deal with that and ideally
what you're eating after you break your
fast
you can have carbs and not have carbs
but don't have sugar don't have seed
oils and eat grass-fed meat or don't eat
meat
and if you follow those basic principles
and there's other nuances in there what
you find is that you feel really good
and the next morning you wake up and
you're not ravenous
and you're like oh yeah i don't even
want breakfast
and that's a very liberating thing
because if we're spending so many of our
thoughts every day on food food food and
then you just aren't hungry
it really changes things so i want
millions of people to say i'm going to
try this basic thing i'm not going to
worry about getting my diet perfect i
might make a few changes but i'm just
going to learn how to intermittent fast
and what i don't want them to do is what
a lot of the fasting community does
where it's all about the fast and you
know every month i'm going to fast for a
week
and what you end up doing is you get
people who become
they basically burn out their adrenals
and so women see sleep problems as the
first symptom that they're overdoing it
and then they see
hormonal problems in their monthly cycle
and then see hair loss and hair thinning
guys same thing but it's usually two to
four weeks out for women first is sleep
problems then you wake up and there
isn't a kickstand
and then
you
it took me a second it got there yeah
and then after that you can see here
thing as well and this is from excess
cortisol because you overdid it and you
can see the same thing from just being
keto for three months straight right
that's why i've always recommended
cycling because i made all these
mistakes when i was learning about all
this stuff it was just very early days
and and so how do you make this
sustainable and the truth is
fasting the same way every day is bad
for you because it doesn't lend
your body the idea of metabolic
flexibility it's like oh i live in a
world where there's almost never enough
food so have breakfast every now and
then at least you know saturday morning
have breakfast with your family and you
can have a keto breakfast or you can
have the gluten-free waffles whatever
you want you should be able to handle
that just don't eat bad oils and over
time it takes about two years to replace
half your cell membranes the oil in
those membranes
over time you'll become more and more
metabolically flexible because your
cells work better but if while you're
intermittent fasting you're still eating
a ton of junk food
you won't get that benefit but you'll
get many other benefits of fasting
you're still going to lose weight you're
still going to have
an improved blood sugar profile but not
as good as if you made a few changes in
the diet so this is something everyone
can do that's cheaper and more
convenient than what you do in the
morning right now
so i don't think we close the loop on
metabolic flexibility before so
metabolic flexibility being
that you've got on one hand you can burn
the glucose and then on the other that
you can burn ketones
most people unless they're paying
attention never get into a space where
they can burn ketones because they're
not creating ketones
can you give people really fast because
i want to get back to what an ideal fast
looks like according to fast this way
but first give people a quick breakdown
about how you put your body in a state
where it will produce ketones and
exactly what they are
ketones are what happens when your body
burns fat instead of sugar naturally it
doesn't happen if you're consuming
carbohydrates in any meaningful amount
and it doesn't happen if you're eating a
ton of protein
and
what happens when you do that is ketones
have more energy in them than glucose
does and the neurons in your brain love
ketones in fact all the cells in your
body do but some of them prefer blood
glucose so all the sudden you get this
feeling of clarity and the natural way
to get into ketosis is you fast for
about two days for the average person
sometimes three and then the body says i
got nothing here i better start burning
my fat stores so it liberates some fat
from the fat stores and all the toxins
from the fat it liberates as well which
is why it's good to mop them up while
you're fasting and then your cells get
get this and they go oh man we've got to
reformat our power plants because
they're used to only having sugar
so it takes metabolic energy to
transform and they literally change
their shape and function so that they're
better at consuming fat
right and that takes a while now you're
metabolically flexible but if you do
that all the time forever your cells are
like why would i ever be configured to
do glucose i live in a world with no
sugar so they aren't very good at that
which is why cycling in and out of
ketosis fasting some of the time but not
other times and not fasting the same way
every day or every week is really
powerful you want to keep the body a
little bit off balance so it's like you
know what i'm ready to make energy at
any time rapidly from any type of fuel
and when you do that you can actually go
out and have a bowl of hopefully
dairy-free ice cream
without bad fats in it so a
coconut-based ice cream and with real
sugar and everything and it'll happen
your blood sugar will go up and come
right back down and you'll be fine and
that's a metabolically flexible person
you do it all the time you won't be
metabolically flexible
right but if you're the guy who has ice
cream every single night well then
what's going to happen is you're not
going to know how to burn fat whatsoever
your body's going to be only sugar
burning and it's it's not going to work
and your blood sugar will always be high
so the idea is occasionally it's okay to
have some carbs i don't recommend you
know ice cream is a major source but
honestly if you're intermittent fasting
you're occasionally in ketosis
you ought to be able to eat a treat that
isn't full of inflammatory stuff like
bad oils and all and be just fine and
the evidence is that people whose
metabolisms work really well they can do
it and their blood sugar doesn't go
bonkers
okay now if we were gonna give somebody
the fastest way starter kit um you know
sort of a what is a basic week look like
what is what is a good entry point where
they're not hangry they're not going
crazy but they're still getting some
benefits anti-inflammatory they're maybe
in
you know ketosis they've got some
autophagy going on like what does that
starter kit fast look like
all right i'm going to to explain that
right here i'm also going to offer
because i was a teacher for five years
at the university of california i wrote
every book i've written i haven't really
been a great teacher of the content i
just write them like you should read it
when people order fast this way and send
the receipt to fastthisway.com
i will teach you this over two weeks
like every morning explaining walking
people through this who are new to
fasting ending in a one or two day
spiritual fast so that's the long answer
to the question is this gonna take me
two weeks but i'll show you the short
answer
is
that do 12 hours without food see if you
can do that if you've never done it
before that's not really technically an
intermittent fast you're just showing
yourself you've got legs and you work
yourself up to 14 hours without food and
that's when you're really starting a
real intermittent fast
and then you maybe the next day have
breakfast just lots of protein lots of
fat no carbs for breakfast right you're
taking it easy and then the next day
okay i'm going to do a 16-hour fast
and
you're you may use all three of the
fasting hacks because you're ravenous
when i was 300 pounds if you told me i
was gonna skip breakfast and lunch i'm
like i will kill the people around me
like i will be such a jerk and it was
true i ate six or eight times a day
because i knew i'd go into starvation
mode if i didn't and all this like
mental garbage we've been told
so what you end up with is this idea
where you're slowly going to work your
way up and it's okay to do that and some
mornings someone's going to bring in
donuts and you're just going to break
your fast and in the book i explain the
psychology and the biology of why that
happens and it's just it's okay right
you have the rest of your life to to do
this that's why it's called a fasting
practice
and it doesn't have to be perfect and
once you get up to that 68 one day
you're going to sit there and go you
know what
it's lunch time but i'm actually not
that hungry so i am going to for the
first time in my adult life
i am going to just say i'm not going
till dinner and then you're really kind
of tricking yourself because it's only
like four or five more hours until
you've had dinner anyway and then you're
going wait a minute the last time i ate
was dinner yesterday but it wasn't pain
it wasn't suffering it wasn't struggle
it wasn't strife it wasn't pushing it
was just oh okay i could do that yeah i
was a little hungry in the afternoon but
i drank some extra water right maybe you
did use coffee coffee's good for you
anyway right it's okay and then no sugar
or cream i'm assuming thank you no sugar
no cream no protein no artificial
sweetener either you can use stevia or
monk fruit if you want to but definitely
not neutral sweeter splenda because
those wreck your gut bacteria
and
it it's really shocking and you see this
look at wonder like wow i can't believe
i i thought i would die
right but i didn't i just did 24 hours
and as we talked about earlier that's
you know one meal a day but if the next
day you're like i did yesterday i'm
going to do it again today and you're
still just getting into it you're
probably not going to feel as good right
so the next day go back to 16-8 right
like slowly work up to it and what
you're doing it's like you go to the gym
say i haven't worked out in two years
but i'm gonna go do a full crossfit
workout right i'm gonna do the full wad
and then the next day you're laying on
your back and you're like i think i have
to go to the hospital my kidneys are
overloaded with protein breakdown you
know i hate my life it's because it's
okay
when you're exercising your cells the
way fasting knows it's okay to just get
started in a healthy
gentle way and work yourself up to this
i can fast for 48 hours and still be
totally fine and and have my brain work
and do interviews like this
and i feel great i can also eat and feel
great but before i'd eat and then i get
the food coma and then you don't feel
very good and then you gotta have some
sugar that doesn't happen either but if
you just go all in and say i'm gonna
start with a ten day water fast
man you're gonna feel like crap and the
deal here is fasting is not about
deprivation and it's not supposed to be
about willpower unless
you're doing a spiritual fast
and what i would say is do fasting in a
painless way which is a big part of the
book or
choose to face the pain and use it as a
spiritual personal development practice
the arc of the book
when i first started this i was afraid
of being hungry i was afraid of being
alone
which was something i came up with
through my personal development work i'm
like oh i didn't realize this so i hired
a shaman to drop me off in the middle of
nowhere in a cave there's no food and
there's no people for 10 miles in any
direction and i'm like i'm going to be
here for four days and
i'm scared you know
i'm pretty scared of this to be
perfectly honest this is the first time
i've done a four day fast
and
when i got out of there i couldn't
believe the energy i had and i i talk in
in the book about you know the the
mental process you go through the first
time you do a fast like that
and
that is a spiritual practice and that's
why at the end of this this challenge
i'm running for people
i am going to say all right here's the
meditation work that you do here's
understanding the voice in your head
because there's these three voices in
your head that make you do everything
you've ever been ashamed of and they're
coming from mitochondria and gut
bacteria
and getting on top of that and just
owning that that's awesome but if you
have to own it every day on top of
everything else in your life it's going
to be overwhelming and it's going to
raise your cortisol and you don't need
to do that to get the benefits what are
the three voices
this is the algorithm that all life runs
it doesn't matter if you're a plant it
doesn't matter if you're a bacteria
which is what's powering us or whether
you know you're a deer and the first
rule is run away from kill or hide from
everything so that's fear and you put 10
times more energy on that than is
necessary
right because from the perspective of
making a life form that will always be
around it should protect itself and you
protect yourself if you're a plant with
hard shells or spikes or toxins and if
you're a bacteria you use toxins or
other defense things
and if you're a person you think you're
out of it and
the second f word which gets about five
times more attention than normal is eat
everything because famines kill lots of
things so now we have fear and we have
food
right and that's why food gets so much
attention when you're fasting because
your bacteria like eat that eat that eat
that eat that eat that and like no no no
and eventually it's like a little kid
wearing you down and okay fine you can
have half the cookie johnny and they're
like why do i eat the cookie i'm such a
bad person no your mitochondria got the
best of you it's okay
and then the third f word what
else does all life have to do to make
sure it's on the earth forever tom
fornicate baby
oh i was thinking fertility but if you
want to just go straight through i'll go
right there
you're correct so i actually was
thinking of the other f word i was just
trying to get you to say it
so nice dodge
what um what's going on there is that
gets about three times more attention
than it deserves
right and
all life has to do it and this explains
everything you've ever done that you're
ashamed of
like all
procrastination all resistance all not
seeing things like that's fear right
eating all the stuff you shouldn't eat
that's food going on that date you know
you shouldn't have gone on
that is the other f word right and this
is in our cells this is not your brain
this is your cellular biology driving
you
to do it and the saving grace in all of
this
and this is towards the end of the book
is that there is a fourth f word that
all life does and it's friend
and this is why we form communities why
we specialize and we're actually wired
to help each other right but if you're
so wrapped up in hunger and so wrapped
up in lack of love and so wrapped up in
fear whether it's from watching too much
news or just your old programming that's
like oh no if if you know if my boss
yells you're a bad person no one will
love me
and you just lose it so if those are
going on we aren't there to help other
people and if you can turn off the
hunger voice it frees up so much more
energy that you can now do the work
necessary to turn down the fear and to
make sure that you're managing the love
in your life and all of a sudden you're
a better person than you were before and
this is why fasting is so important
because it has the power to give you the
energy to overcome the other f words
that are messing with you on a daily
basis and it's not because we're bad
people it's a separate operating system
meant to keep you alive it's not trying
to harm you it just makes you do stupid
stuff all the time and fasting is a way
out of that trap
is that the reason that this is such a
time-honored tradition for spiritual
traditions to use fasting or is there
something more was there what were all
the things that you learned or
discovered in the cave
there are two reasons that spiritual
fasting works and i actually reference a
bunch of different fasting practices
from around the world in the book that
are all spiritual traditions one of them
is that when the neurons in your brain
get ketones from fasting you actually
think better you have more energy for
thinking and for awareness food tastes
better colors are brighter
right and you're aware of sensations in
your body in the world around you it's
like someone went from black and white
to color tv so so you get this this
energy is like wow i like this and if
you take that energy and you turn it
inwards you become aware of what's going
on in there in a way that you normally
wouldn't be
and i believe that's a part of it and
the other part of it is
you know you do have to to feel the
hunger and have willpower to overcome
the hunger for two days or so and it's
about showing yourself who's in charge
right and that is a spiritual practice
in and of itself but it's the the
clarity that comes and with that clarity
you can do deep work
i want to talk about that growing part
so you said in the cave you know doing a
extended fast like that you're creating
the space to do the deep work or you
have the energy to do the deep work what
was the deep work like what was it that
and i mean you talk about in the books i
don't think i'm going out of school here
but what was it that drew you to wanting
to do a spiritual fast um and then
you know what what did you encounter
that you've taken with you
well i'd i'd lost a lot of weight but i
recognized i still had uh you know a
fear of being hungry because when your
metabolism doesn't work when you're as
fat as i was if you don't have food your
brain stops working i had a great career
in silicon valley you know very
cognitively demanding but interesting
and fascinating and you're in a meeting
and like
my brain won't work like i'm trying to
think right now and i got nothing like
the accelerator's all the way to the
floor
and i'm slowing down i can push hard but
it doesn't matter how much i try doesn't
match i want it's not a willpower or a
moral issue it's a biological issue so
you become afraid of being hungry
because you don't want to be disabled
right and i had that and i recognized i
had that i didn't know what to do about
it i said well i'm just gonna you know
face it and one thing that happens when
you face your fears they lose their
power so for me in the cave i'm like
there's no one around like
showing myself i'm actually still safe
with no food i'm i'm still safe with no
companionship right and then to be able
to go you know what great i'm not going
to die and that soaks into your body
it's not during the day
you're just sitting there thinking
you're walking around i sat there i'd
think and say you know what okay i'm
just gonna go walk i'd walk up the
little canyon where i was you know i
stack up rocks i had a little journal
and and just really
feel but you know you think about all
the stuff you've done uh that man i wish
i hadn't done that like now i understand
what was driving me to do that and you
really you gain insight and and you you
feel way more connected
uh to the world around you and like most
like yeah i'm gonna fast i'm gonna have
my metabolism i'm going to get younger
i'm going to lose weight and get abs and
get all these benefits you're like
actually you have no distractions when
you're fasting so if you remove all the
distractions from your world and you do
some of the other things that i talk
about in the book briefly you know
fasting from sex
is a very powerful practice that raises
your testosterone if you're a man if
you're a woman it probably isn't
beneficial
um
there's other things towards the end of
the book like fasting from hate like try
to go
four hours without thinking one bad
thought about another person and then go
24 hours it is remarkably difficult to
do that and you become aware during that
time i cannot believe how often i'm like
sending dirt towards people that i
didn't know i was doing it costs you to
send them dirt you got to make the
electrons do that and it gives it does
nothing for you
right so
you can go without many different things
but when you have the clarity and the
time to sit in a cave like why am i
thinking about this right now like why
is it pushing my buttons why did that
show up for me right now and then you
you dig on it like oh my god i'd never
thought about it like that
and this is once i had the clarity of
ketones right i had zero inputs anywhere
i had no food in front of me to to
challenge me and i could say oh i'm
really hungry and then i'm like why am i
thinking that i know there's no food
here and like who's thinking that
because it's not me
and then you realize oh there actually
is a separate consciousness that's
driving my biology and i i mean you can
see the effect of that consciousness
using neurofeedback and all it's one of
the things i do with my neurofeedback
company 40 years of zen and
it's wow there's this whole thing that's
like making me worry about stuff that i
know isn't a threat and it's making me
worry about food when i know i'm not
going to starve i'm like wait why what
and then you start really getting in
there and you when you're done with a
spiritual fast like that you can develop
a sense of
first
empathy like i i feel the pain that i
felt i feel the pain of others when
they're hungry right and then the level
beyond that in spiritual teaching
teachings
is a sense of compassion where instead
of having to feel everyone else's pain
you can see the pain and you feel
open-heartedness towards them and you
know want to serve without taking it in
and the final state which is the hardest
one to develop in these open-hearted
buddhist practices is equanimity which
is where you can be completely calm and
at peace no matter what's happening
inside or outside of you
and and that's the kind of things that
can develop would you sit in the cave
for days because you're like wow i had
all this garbage in my mind that i
didn't know was in there because i had
nothing else to do but unpack it and
we're just too busy to do that but i
would say
the fasting runs from i skipped
breakfast and i had more energy and i'm
better off metabolically all the way up
to
i sat somewhere for several days in
intense personal development but when
most people hear fasting all they hear
is i'll starve therefore i'll die and
then they blank out to it and
no this is about more energy
and it's about more clarity and less
time wasted
and less pain in your life yeah and
hearing you describe the way people push
back seeing how even today sort of the
mainstream
medical establishment thinks of fasting
and how it's considered so sort of
outlandish and you know people
immediately go to well you're going to
give
people anorexia and it's such a bizarre
reaction and when you think about those
three f's and and the fear that seems to
be driving people's perception of this
do you have like a magic
phrase
or idea that you can give to people that
are really resistant to get them to try
it
you can fast without ever being hungry
and without ever suffering
and you'll have more energy but when i
was
you know really heavy still i was eating
super healthy what i thought was healthy
you know low-fat
low-calorie stuff
but i was still working on it and if you
told me i had to fast i'd be like no
like i'm not gonna i'll go into
starvation mode and it's gonna suck and
then i won't be able to do my job and
you know i'll act like a jerk and all
that stuff that message is playing super
loud for everyone who's got extra pounds
and then they have this desire to fast
but then you feel like a failure
because the automated system in your
body
wants you to eat
and you don't know how to deal with it
so the deal is i'm going to put you in
charge
that's what's going on here and so all
of the bad things that you think about
fasting won't happen what's going to
happen is you're going to save time and
you're going to feel better than you do
today and you'll never be hungry and
then like okay i'm gonna try this once i
think you're full of crap and they
almost always start with a fasting hack
there's a reason that there's been
several hundred million cups of
bulletproof coffee and people lost a
million pounds on the bulletproof diet
it's because when they had that fat in
the morning they were intermittent
fasting they just didn't feel hungry
and for the first time in their lives
when lunch time came around they're like
i guess i could eat
instead of the way i used to be which is
like what's for lunch what's for lunch
tacos you know that whole voice it just
shuts up and oh my god it's so
liberating
yeah it really does change your
relationship to hunger that was the
thing that i could never quite get
people to understand about ketosis
specifically and it's not like you're
not hungry it's that it doesn't have a
grip on you
which is very very different
it's because there's two things that we
confuse one is a craving and the other
is hunger
and hunger is the sense that you know
what it's time to eat sometime soon
but i could wait a while and a craving
is if i don't eat right now someone's
gonna die whether it's me or someone
else
and most people eat in such a way that
they always experience cravings and
they've never experienced just hunger
without a craving i was like that a
hundred percent and when you clean out
the stuff that's causing the cravings
like wow
the experience of lunch is so different
so for somebody that's new they're in
that space where they just can't imagine
where can people
i mean they can buy the book at amazon
and all the normal places but where
where can they engage with you and
really get the help that they need to
give this a shot
order the book wherever you like to
order books and send me a receipt
there's a little upload form on
fastthisway.com
uh and i will register you for two weeks
of training where i walk you through
here's what you're gonna do today here's
what we're gonna do tomorrow and you're
gonna do it in a community of thousands
and thousands of people sharing your
results because having other people
doing it with you is really motivational
so when you feel like you know maybe
i'll just have one bite of the donut and
like i'm going to post about this later
i don't think i want to tell people
about the donut i'll skip the doughnut
so it's a little bit of extra willpower
there but honestly if you're doing this
the right way
you probably won't need the willpower
and i just want to teach that
i hear it all right guys trust me man
fasting is a game changer read the book
it's very interesting it's a very unique
take on all of this and as always dave
is taking people by the hand showing
them exactly what they need to do he's
got like a dozen companies that'll help
you in one way or another uh so be sure
to check this man out and speaking of
things that will help you in one way or
another if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care thank you
all right how do you know when it's time
to break up will having kids ruin your
dreams why can't you control that ugly
jealousy when do you know if it's time
to move in or get the hell out these are
just a few of the no holds barred no bs
conversations we'll tackle on the new
youtube channel relationship theory
along with my wife the lovely and
talented lisa bill you will bring our 20
years of experience juggling our
entrepreneurial aspirations while
maintaining a strong relationship
through all the obstacles that have
smacked us in the gut walloped us upside
the head on a daily basis it's just as
hard to maintain a relationship as it is
to build a successful company maybe even
harder
but it is well worth it certainly more
worth it than building a company and if
you can't maintain a healthy
relationship then there's no way you're
going to be able to thrive in your
business environment it's absolutely
impossible
we might be thriving now but it wasn't
always the case for us we had to deal
with family pressure financial struggles
and a never-ending stream of obstacles
and just when you think one problem has
been solved ten others are going to slam
right into you and let me tell you if
you can't deal with the inevitable
struggles that are coming your way
there's no way that you're going to stay
together like most of our success we've
gotten to where we are by making a lot
of mistakes and learning along the way
and now
through relationship theory we're
sharing everything that we've learned
lisa and i will tell you that if you
want to stay together you better open up
or shut up we'll also share some secrets
on how to keep the sexual spark alive
and practical tools to help you stop
fighting for anyone that wants to
improve their relationship or get ready
to have one this show is for you so if
you want to level up on your
relationship game boys and girls you
need to watch and subscribe to
relationship theory at youtube.com
forward slash relationship theory or
click the link at the top of the episode
description take care and be legendary
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you